1.2 (unreleased)
----------------

New Features
^^^^^^^^^^^^
- Unit milimeter on ``"pos"`` and ``"dir"`` columns of photonlist. [#169]

- Add method `marxs.simulator.Parallel.move_center` to change the ``pos4d``
  value of a `marxs.simulator.Parallel` and adjust position of elements at
  the same time. [#169]

- Refactor `marxs.analysis.analysis.find_best_detector_position` to allow
  for more general objective functions. [#171]

- Update plotting for `marxs.optics.aperture.CircleAperture` to give more 
  flexibility in plotting the inner part of a ring-like aperture. This is
  needed for models or stacked, rind-like apertures. [#180]

- Add new module `marxs.design.tolerancing` to estimate alignment tolerances.
  [#186]

- Add class `marxs.optics.RandomGaussianScatter`. [#192]

- The column names for blaze and order written by
  `marxs.optics.FlatGrating` can now be configured. [#195]

- Add a number of helper functions (incl. plotting) to 
  `marxs.design.tolerancing`. [#199]

- Add a module to simulate CAT gratings manufactures in MIT's SNL. [#202]

- Make MIT SNL grating specification more flexible. [#210]


API Changes
^^^^^^^^^^^
- The geometry of a class is now defined as a separate object from the new
  `marxs.math.geometry` module. Before, the geometry was backed into the 
  optical components itself which led to significant code duplication. The new
  scheme allows to make e.g. cylindrical and flat gratings with the same 
  gratings objects. However, not all geometries work with all objects and there
  is currently no way to check automatically - the user has to use caution or
  check the code. [#182]

- Geometry objects provide item access like this
  ``detector.geometry['center']`` instead of a function interface with
  ``(...)``. [#182]

- Remove ``utils.MergeIdentical`` merge strategy since it is not longer used
  after #189. [#191]

- `~astropy.units.Quantity` is used in more places, and thus
  the base classes need to accept quantities as output from 
  "specific_process_photons". This change requires some care and thus 
  is done gradually only where needed at this point. [#202]

- `~marxs.optics.RandomGaussianScatter` can be initialized without setting 
  scatter, provided that its already defined a class level variable (e.g.
  for subclasses). [#202]

- `~marxs.optics.RandomGaussianScatter` and `~marxs.optics.Scatter` now expect
  angular quantities instead of plai floats. [#216]


Bug fixes
^^^^^^^^^

- `marxs.analysis.gratings.resolvingpower_per_order` has been updated to ignore
  photons with probability 0. [#162]

- An index mix-up in `marxs.simulator.ParallelCalculated.calculate_elempos` introduced
  unintended zoom and shear in the elements. [#164]

- [#159] left behind an undefined ``filterfunc``. This is fixed and a
  regression test added. [#165]

- `marxs.analysis.analysis.find_best_detector_position` will now change the
  detector position always along an axis perpendicular to the detector plane.
  [#171]

- `marxs.optics.scatter.RadialMirrorScatter` now works with
  ``inplanescatter=0`` which is useful for parameters studies. [#174]

- Plot only "half-box" for elements such as mirrors where the optical
  interaction occurs on a surface. [#178]

- With `marxs.optics.MultiAperture` photons would always be sorted by aperture
  number. To fix this, apertures now behave more like other optical elements
  and use ``process_photons``. [#189]

- `marxs.optics.FlatStack` now inherits from `marxs.simulator.BaseContainer`.
  [#196]

- Fix bug in distributions generated by `marxs.source.SphericalDiskSource`. [#202]

- Objects now fail to generate when zoom is set to 0. [#217]
  
Other changes and additions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
- Examples are now written for numpy >= 1.14 (which changed some printing
  formats). [#182]

1.1 (15-Jul-2017)
-----------------

New Features
^^^^^^^^^^^^
- Add ability to plot cylinders in Mayavi (for support struts) [#147]

- Add shape `"None"` (as a string) to avoid plotting an object [#157]

API Changes
^^^^^^^^^^^
- Remove ``marxs.source.LabPointSource``, which was just a special case of
  `~marxs.source.LabPointSourceCone`. Instead, set the default values of the
  later so that it reproduces the behaviour of the former. [#144]

- `~marxs.optics.multiLayerMirror.MultiLayerEfficiency` and
  `~marxs.optics.multiLayerMirror.MultiLayerMirror` now
  expect all parameters as keyword arguments for consistency with the other
  elements in MARXS. [#144]

- ``marxs.visualization.utils.format_saved_positions`` is now a method of
  `~marxs.simulator.KeepCol` with the new name ``format_positions()`` and
  the ``atol`` keyword can be switched off.
  Additionally, `~marxs.simulator.KeepCol` now has a ``__array__`` method.
  This makes the function useful for columns that
  are not positions, but e.g. polarization vectors.
  On the other hand, the ``plot_rays`` functions do not accept
  `~marxs.simulator.KeepCol` objects directly as input any longer.
  [#149, #152]

- According to the docs, a pointing could be initialized with either a 
  `~astropy.coordinates.SkyCoord` or a tuple that would initialize the
  `~astropy.coordinates.SkyCoord`. The later option was broken and has 
  been removed entirely. [#151]

- Remove parameter ``filterfunc`` from `~marxs.analysis.gratings.resolvingpower_from_photonlist` and `~marxs.analysis.analysis.detected_fraction`.
  Instead, the photon list can be filtered before calling these functions
  just as easily. [#159]

Bug fixes
^^^^^^^^^
- Added missing keywords in display dict for some objects and fixed exception
  when plotting things that are not objects. Discovered and fixed as part of
  [#147].

- Polarization after reflection from a mirror used to just parallel transport
  the vector and calculate the probability of the photon based on s and p
  polarization. This needs to be applied to the outgoing polarization vector,
  too. [#148]

- Plotting of Rowland Torus failed in Mayavi due to typo. [#154]


Other changes and additions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
- Improve Documentation [#146]

- Docs: Add polarization example [#153]

- Docs: Add example to calculate flux from normalized spectrum [#160]

- Add experiemental data for comparison to the polarization example [#158]

1.0 (14-Apr-2017)
-----------------
This is the first release intended to use. The Change log will begin starting 
with this release.

0.1 (experimental release)
--------------------------
This release was not intended to be used, but the verisioning scheme in the 
development branch required a tagged commit.
