docs/conventions.rst, before:

********************************************
Coordinates, physical units and polarization
********************************************

.. _coordsys:
.. _pos4d:

Coordinate system
=================
Marxs employs a cartesian coordinate system. All optical elements can be freely placed at any position
and any angle in this space, but we recommend the following conventions for simplicity (examples and
predefined missions in this pckage follow those conventions as far as possible):

- The optical axis of the telescope coincides with the x-axis. A source on the optical axis is
  at :math:`x=+\infty` and photons travel towards the origin.
- The origin of the coordiante system is at the telescope focus.
- The y-axis coincides with the dispersion direction of gratings.

Marxs uses `homogeneous coordinates <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Homogeneous_coordinates>`_, which
describe position and direction in a 4 dimensional coordinate space, for example
:math:`[3, 0, 0, 1]` describes a point at x=3, y=0 and z=0; :math:`[3, 0, 0, 0]` describes the
vector from the origin to that point. Homogeneous coordinates have one important advantage compared
with a normal 3-d description of euklidean space: In homogenous coordinates, rotation, zoom, and
translations together can be described by a :math:`[4, 4]` matrix and several of these operations can
be chained simply by multiplying the matrices.

Every optical element in marxs (and some other objects, too) has such a :math:`[4, 4]` matrix
associated with it in an attribute called ``element.pos4d``.

All optical elements have some default location and position. Typically, their active surface (e.g.
the surface of a mirror or detector) is in the y-z plane. The center is at the origin of the
coordiante system and the default size in each dimenstion is 1, measured from the center.
Thus, e.g. the default definition for a `marxs.optics.detector.FlatDetector`, makes a detector surface with
the following corners (in 3-d x,y,z coordinates): [0, -1, -1], [0, -1, 1], [0, 1, 1] and [0, 1, -1].
This detector has the thickness 2 (from x=-1 to x=+1), but that only matters for display purposes, since the ray-trace
calculates the intersection with the "active surface" in the y-z plane independent of the
thickeness in x-direction. There are exceptions to these defaults, those are noted in the description
of the individual optical elements.
See the following sketch, where the "active surface" is shown in red:

.. plot:: plots/sketch_coords.py optical_element_coords
   :scale: 50
   :align: center
   :include-source: False
   :alt: Layout of the default size and position of an optical elements. The "active surface" (e.g. the surface of a mirror) is shown in red.


In order to place elements in the experiment, the optical element needs to be
scaled (zoomed), rotatated and translated to the the new position.
There are two ways to specify that:

- Pass a :math:`[4,4]` matrix to the optical element:

      >>> import numpy as np
      >>> from marxs.optics import Baffle
      >>> pos4d = np.array([[1., 0., 0., 5.],
      ...                   [0., 2., 0., 0.],
      ...                   [0., 0., 2., 0.],
      ...                   [0., 0., 0., 1.]])
      >>> baf1 = Baffle(pos4d=pos4d)

  This sides of this baffle have length 4 (from -2 to 2). The center is on the x-axis, but 5 units
  upwards from the origin.

- Use the keywords ``orientation``, ``zoom``, and ``position``. The code will construct the ``pos4d``
  matrix from those keywords, by first scaling with ``zoom``, then applying the rotation matrix
  ``orientation`` and lastly, moving the center of the optical element to ``position``.
  The same baffle as above can also be written as:

      >>> baf2 = Baffle(zoom=[1., 2., 2.], position=[5., 0., 0.])
      >>> np.all(baf2.pos4d == baf1.pos4d)
      True


  It is an error to specify ``pos4d`` and any of the ``orientation``, ``zoom``, and ``position``
  keywords at the same time.

.. note::

   The `transforms3d <https://matthew-brett.github.io/transforms3d/index.html>`_ package provides
   several functions to calculate 3-d and 4-d matrices from Euler angles, axis and angle,
   quaternions and several other representations. This package is installed together with marxs.

Polarization
============
In principle, MARXS supports polarization ray-tracing, but only very few
optical elements actually change the polarization vector of a photon. In these
cases, that is explicitly explained in the description. All other elements do
not change the polarization state of a photon. For some, this is physically
correct (e.g. a photon passing through the hole in baffle), in other cases this
behavior just a reasonable approximation (e.g. most diffraction gratings
polarize light only to a very small degree).

Make sure to inspect the implementation of all relevant optical elements if
your simulation makes use of the photon polarization vector.

In the ray-trace itself, MARXS represents the polarization of each photon as a
3d-vector and then uses matrices to move this vector in space. This is an
extension of the 2-d `Jones calculus
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jones_calculus>`_, which is particularly suited
for light paths that are not all parallel to an optical bench [Chipman_1992]_ .
See [Yun_et_al_2011]_ and [Yun_2011]_ for details on polarization ray tracing and
the derivation of the relevant matrices.

This mechanism can handle both linear and circular polarized light. However,
the light sources currently included in MARXS only support linear
polarization.

.. rubric:: Bibliography

.. [Chipman_1992] `Proc. SPIE 1746, Polarization Analysis and Measurement, (11
		  December 1992)
		  <http://spie.org/Publications/Proceedings/Paper/10.1117/12.138816>`_
.. [Yun_et_al_2011] `Three-dimensional polarization ray-tracing calculus I:
		    definition and diattenuation," Appl. Opt. 50, 2855-2865
		    (2011) <https://doi.org/10.1364/AO.50.002855>`_

.. [Yun_2011] `Polarization Ray Tracing: G. Yun, University of Arizona, dissertation <http://hdl.handle.net/10150/202979>`_
  
Physical units
==============
MARXS uses `astropy units
<http://astropy.readthedocs.io/en/stable/units/index.html>` and
`astropy.coordinates.SkyCoord` for input of source properties and
coordinates. This makes quantities having a specific unit and avoids confusion
between degree and radian, eV and keV and so on.

Internally, however, this extra unit makes the computation too slow. Thus, all
properties are converted to float when they his the first optical element using
the following conventions:

- Length: base unit is mm.
- Energy: base unit is keV.
- Angles: Always expressed in radian.

When designing an instrument, these units much be used.

Commit message:

update docs for new half-box plotting

docs/conventions.rst, after:

********************************************
Coordinates, physical units and polarization
********************************************

.. _coordsys:
.. _pos4d:

Coordinate system
=================
Marxs employs a cartesian coordinate system. All optical elements can be freely placed at any position
and any angle in this space, but we recommend the following conventions for simplicity (examples and
predefined missions in this pckage follow those conventions as far as possible):

- The optical axis of the telescope coincides with the x-axis. A source on the optical axis is
  at :math:`x=+\infty` and photons travel towards the origin.
- The origin of the coordiante system is at the telescope focus.
- The y-axis coincides with the dispersion direction of gratings.

Marxs uses `homogeneous coordinates <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Homogeneous_coordinates>`_, which
describe position and direction in a 4 dimensional coordinate space, for example
:math:`[3, 0, 0, 1]` describes a point at x=3, y=0 and z=0; :math:`[3, 0, 0, 0]` describes the
vector from the origin to that point. Homogeneous coordinates have one important advantage compared
with a normal 3-d description of euklidean space: In homogenous coordinates, rotation, zoom, and
translations together can be described by a :math:`[4, 4]` matrix and several of these operations can
be chained simply by multiplying the matrices.

Every optical element in marxs (and some other objects, too) has such a :math:`[4, 4]` matrix
associated with it in an attribute called ``element.pos4d``.

All optical elements have some default location and position. Typically, their active surface (e.g.
the surface of a mirror or detector) is in the y-z plane. The center is at the origin of the
coordiante system and the default size in each dimenstion is 1, measured from the center.
Thus, e.g. the default definition for a `marxs.optics.detector.FlatDetector`, makes a detector surface with
the following corners (in 3-d x,y,z coordinates): [0, -1, -1], [0, -1, 1], [0,
1, 1] and [0, 1, -1].
Note that in a 3D visualization (see :ref:`visualization`), some elements might be shown with a thickness
2 (from :math:`x=-1` to :math:`x=+1`), so that the "active surface" is in the middle of a box,
while others might show the "active surface" as the edge of the box as in the
sketch below. Details depend on the capabilities of the plotting backend
(backends and options are listed in :ref:`sect-vis-api`).

However, when running the ray-trace the code
calculates the intersection with the "active surface" in the y-z plane independent of the
thickeness in x-direction. There are exceptions to these defaults, those are noted in the description
of the individual optical elements.
See the following sketch, where the "active surface" is shown in red:

.. plot:: plots/sketch_coords.py optical_element_coords
   :scale: 50
   :align: center
   :include-source: False
   :alt: Layout of the default size and position of an optical elements. The "active surface" (e.g. the surface of a mirror) is shown in red.


In order to place elements in the experiment, the optical element needs to be
scaled (zoomed), rotatated and translated to the the new position.
There are two ways to specify that:

- Pass a :math:`[4,4]` matrix to the optical element:

      >>> import numpy as np
      >>> from marxs.optics import Baffle
      >>> pos4d = np.array([[1., 0., 0., 5.],
      ...                   [0., 2., 0., 0.],
      ...                   [0., 0., 2., 0.],
      ...                   [0., 0., 0., 1.]])
      >>> baf1 = Baffle(pos4d=pos4d)

  This sides of this baffle have length 4 (from -2 to 2). The center is on the x-axis, but 5 units
  upwards from the origin.

- Use the keywords ``orientation``, ``zoom``, and ``position``. The code will construct the ``pos4d``
  matrix from those keywords, by first scaling with ``zoom``, then applying the rotation matrix
  ``orientation`` and lastly, moving the center of the optical element to ``position``.
  The same baffle as above can also be written as:

      >>> baf2 = Baffle(zoom=[1., 2., 2.], position=[5., 0., 0.])
      >>> np.all(baf2.pos4d == baf1.pos4d)
      True


  It is an error to specify ``pos4d`` and any of the ``orientation``, ``zoom``, and ``position``
  keywords at the same time.

.. note::

   The `transforms3d <https://matthew-brett.github.io/transforms3d/index.html>`_ package provides
   several functions to calculate 3-d and 4-d matrices from Euler angles, axis and angle,
   quaternions and several other representations. This package is installed together with marxs.

Polarization
============
In principle, MARXS supports polarization ray-tracing, but only very few
optical elements actually change the polarization vector of a photon. In these
cases, that is explicitly explained in the description. All other elements do
not change the polarization state of a photon. For some, this is physically
correct (e.g. a photon passing through the hole in baffle), in other cases this
behavior just a reasonable approximation (e.g. most diffraction gratings
polarize light only to a very small degree).

Make sure to inspect the implementation of all relevant optical elements if
your simulation makes use of the photon polarization vector.

In the ray-trace itself, MARXS represents the polarization of each photon as a
3d-vector and then uses matrices to move this vector in space. This is an
extension of the 2-d `Jones calculus
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jones_calculus>`_, which is particularly suited
for light paths that are not all parallel to an optical bench [Chipman_1992]_ .
See [Yun_et_al_2011]_ and [Yun_2011]_ for details on polarization ray tracing and
the derivation of the relevant matrices.

This mechanism can handle both linear and circular polarized light. However,
the light sources currently included in MARXS only support linear
polarization.

.. rubric:: Bibliography

.. [Chipman_1992] `Proc. SPIE 1746, Polarization Analysis and Measurement, (11
		  December 1992)
		  <http://spie.org/Publications/Proceedings/Paper/10.1117/12.138816>`_
.. [Yun_et_al_2011] `Three-dimensional polarization ray-tracing calculus I:
		    definition and diattenuation," Appl. Opt. 50, 2855-2865
		    (2011) <https://doi.org/10.1364/AO.50.002855>`_

.. [Yun_2011] `Polarization Ray Tracing: G. Yun, University of Arizona, dissertation <http://hdl.handle.net/10150/202979>`_
  
Physical units
==============
MARXS uses `astropy units
<http://astropy.readthedocs.io/en/stable/units/index.html>` and
`astropy.coordinates.SkyCoord` for input of source properties and
coordinates. This makes quantities having a specific unit and avoids confusion
between degree and radian, eV and keV and so on.

Internally, however, this extra unit makes the computation too slow. Thus, all
properties are converted to float when they his the first optical element using
the following conventions:

- Length: base unit is mm.
- Energy: base unit is keV.
- Angles: Always expressed in radian.

When designing an instrument, these units much be used.
