docs/examples.rst, before:

****************
Further examples
****************

In :ref:`visualization` we walked through one example where we defined an instrument
setup, run photons through it, and looked at the results. In this section, we show
another example.

Polarization
------------

This is a laboratory setup. The X-ray source is some cathode, which we
approximate as a monoenergetic point source (but see :ref:`sect-source-fluxenpol` for how to specify the whole spectrum). The aperture of the source is a small circular hole, so we simulate a beam of X-rays with a small opening angle::

  >>> from copy import copy
  >>> from transforms3d import euler
  >>> from marxs.source import LabPointSourceCone

  >>> from marxs.simulator import Sequence, KeepCol
  >>> light = LabPointSourceCone(position=[200., 0., 0.], direction=[-1., 0, 0],
  ...                            half_opening=0.02)
  >>> # keep a copy of the position and direction for later
  >>> light_pos = light.position.copy()
  >>> light_dir = light.dir.copy()

These X-rays shine on a mirror (green rectangle in the figure below) at an angle very close to the `Brewster angle <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brewster%27s_angle>`_, where only photons that are s-polarized (perpendicular to the plane of reflection, *s* from German senkrecht) are reflected::

  >>> import numpy as np
  >>> from marxs.optics import FlatBrewsterMirror, FlatDetector
  >>> rot1 = np.array([[2.**(-0.5), 0, -2.**(-0.5)],
  ...                  [0, 1., 0],
  ...                  [2.**(-0.5), 0, 2.**(-0.5)]])
  >>> m1 = FlatBrewsterMirror(orientation=rot1,zoom=[1, 10, 30])
  >>> # Keep a copy of the initial position for later
  >>> m1pos4d = m1.pos4d.copy()

Although the beam is slightly diverging, we will make the approximation that all photons hit the mirror at exactly the Brewster angle. Multi-layer mirrors with several hundred layers reach a reflection efficiency of a few percent for soft X-rays, where the wavelength of the photons that are reflected is fixed by the thickness of the layers and `Bragg's law <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bragg%27s_law>`_. In this calculation, the reflection probability will have the same effect on every photon, so it just adds an overall normalization when we look at the number of photons detected later and we ignore it for now. Altogether, the combination of source and first mirror can be thought of as a "source of polarized X-rays".

From the first mirror, the photons travel to a second mirror (blue), which reflects them onto a detector (yellow). Again, the mirror only reflects photons that are s-polarized and
sends them to the detector::

  >>> rot2 = np.array([[2.**(-0.5), 0, 2.**(-0.5)],
  ...                  [0, 1., 0],
  ...                  [-2.**(-0.5), 0, 2.**(-0.5)]])
  >>> m2 = FlatBrewsterMirror(orientation=rot2,zoom=[1, 10, 30], position=[0, 0, 2e2])
  >>> # display is usually set for all objects of a class.
  >>> # To change only one mirror, make a copy of this dictionary first.
  >>> m2.display = copy(m2.display)
  >>> m2.display['color'] = 'blue'
  >>> det = FlatDetector(position=[50, 0, 2e2], zoom=[1., 20., 20.])

We now turn the combination of X-ray source and first mirror around the y-axis (the line green mirror to blue mirror), thus changing the polarization vector of the photons when they arrive at the second mirror, and watch how the number of detected photons changes:

.. doctest-requires:: mayavi

  >>> # Make an object that keeps the photon position after every simulation step
  >>> # for later plotting of photon paths.
  >>> pos = KeepCol('pos')
  >>> experiment = Sequence(elements=[m1, m2, det], postprocess_steps=[pos])
  >>> from mayavi import mlab
  >>> from marxs.visualization.mayavi import plot_object, plot_rays
  >>> fig = mlab.figure()
  >>> for i, angle in enumerate(np.arange(0, .5, .15) * np.pi):
  ...   rotmat = np.eye(4)
  ...   rotmat[:3, :3] = euler.euler2mat(angle, 0, 0, 'szxy')
  ...   light.position = np.dot(rotmat, light_pos)
  ...   light.dir = np.dot(rotmat, light_dir)
  ...   m1.pos4d = np.dot(rotmat, m1pos4d)
  ...   rays = light(100)
  ...   pos.data = []
  ...   pos(rays)
  ...   rays = experiment(rays)
  ...   # Now do the plotting
  ...   obj = plot_object(experiment, viewer=fig)
  ...   rout = plot_rays(pos.format_positions())

The plot shows four source positions and the corresponding four positions of the green
mirror on top of each other.

.. raw:: html

  <div class="figure" align="center">
  <x3d width='500px' height='400px'> 
  <scene>
  <inline url="_static/ex_pol.x3d"> </inline> 
  </scene> 
  </x3d>
  <p class="caption" style="clear:both;"><span class="caption-text">
  3D view of the instrument set up. Green lines are photon paths. The first mirror, which rotates together with the source is green, the second mirror is blue and the detector is yellow. Four different source and mirror positions are shown in the same plot. Use your mouse to rotate, pan and zoom. <a href="https://www.x3dom.org/documentation/interaction/">(Detailed instructions for camera navigation)</a> </span></p>
  </div>

We can now modify this script to use finer steps in angle and rotate the source around the full circle. In each step we record the number of photons detected and find that, indeed, it goes to zero when the two mirrors are located such that the s-polarized photons from the green mirror arrive with a parallel polarization on the blue mirror.

.. plot:: pyplots/vis_pol.py
   :include-source:

Commit message:

Add Marshal et al data to pol simulation example

docs/examples.rst, after:

****************
Further examples
****************

In :ref:`visualization` we walked through one example where we defined an instrument
setup, run photons through it, and looked at the results. In this section, we show
another example.

Polarization
------------

This is a laboratory setup. The X-ray source is some cathode, which we
approximate as a monoenergetic point source (but see :ref:`sect-source-fluxenpol` for how to specify the whole spectrum). The aperture of the source is a small circular hole, so we simulate a beam of X-rays with a small opening angle::

  >>> from copy import copy
  >>> from transforms3d import euler
  >>> from marxs.source import LabPointSourceCone

  >>> from marxs.simulator import Sequence, KeepCol
  >>> light = LabPointSourceCone(position=[200., 0., 0.], direction=[-1., 0, 0],
  ...                            half_opening=0.02)
  >>> # keep a copy of the position and direction for later
  >>> light_pos = light.position.copy()
  >>> light_dir = light.dir.copy()

These X-rays shine on a mirror (green rectangle in the figure below) at an angle very close to the `Brewster angle <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brewster%27s_angle>`_, where only photons that are s-polarized (perpendicular to the plane of reflection, *s* from German senkrecht) are reflected::

  >>> import numpy as np
  >>> from marxs.optics import FlatBrewsterMirror, FlatDetector
  >>> rot1 = np.array([[2.**(-0.5), 0, -2.**(-0.5)],
  ...                  [0, 1., 0],
  ...                  [2.**(-0.5), 0, 2.**(-0.5)]])
  >>> m1 = FlatBrewsterMirror(orientation=rot1,zoom=[1, 10, 30])
  >>> # Keep a copy of the initial position for later
  >>> m1pos4d = m1.pos4d.copy()

Although the beam is slightly diverging, we will make the approximation that all photons hit the mirror at exactly the Brewster angle. Multi-layer mirrors with several hundred layers reach a reflection efficiency of a few percent for soft X-rays, where the wavelength of the photons that are reflected is fixed by the thickness of the layers and `Bragg's law <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bragg%27s_law>`_. In this calculation, the reflection probability will have the same effect on every photon, so it just adds an overall normalization when we look at the number of photons detected later and we ignore it for now. Altogether, the combination of source and first mirror can be thought of as a "source of polarized X-rays".

From the first mirror, the photons travel to a second mirror (blue), which reflects them onto a detector (yellow). Again, the mirror only reflects photons that are s-polarized and
sends them to the detector::

  >>> rot2 = np.array([[2.**(-0.5), 0, 2.**(-0.5)],
  ...                  [0, 1., 0],
  ...                  [-2.**(-0.5), 0, 2.**(-0.5)]])
  >>> m2 = FlatBrewsterMirror(orientation=rot2,zoom=[1, 10, 30], position=[0, 0, 2e2])
  >>> # display is usually set for all objects of a class.
  >>> # To change only one mirror, make a copy of this dictionary first.
  >>> m2.display = copy(m2.display)
  >>> m2.display['color'] = 'blue'
  >>> det = FlatDetector(position=[50, 0, 2e2], zoom=[1., 20., 20.])

We now turn the combination of X-ray source and first mirror around the y-axis (the line green mirror to blue mirror), thus changing the polarization vector of the photons when they arrive at the second mirror, and watch how the number of detected photons changes:

.. doctest-requires:: mayavi

  >>> # Make an object that keeps the photon position after every simulation step
  >>> # for later plotting of photon paths.
  >>> pos = KeepCol('pos')
  >>> experiment = Sequence(elements=[m1, m2, det], postprocess_steps=[pos])
  >>> from mayavi import mlab
  >>> from marxs.visualization.mayavi import plot_object, plot_rays
  >>> fig = mlab.figure()
  >>> for i, angle in enumerate(np.arange(0, .5, .15) * np.pi):
  ...   rotmat = np.eye(4)
  ...   rotmat[:3, :3] = euler.euler2mat(angle, 0, 0, 'szxy')
  ...   light.position = np.dot(rotmat, light_pos)
  ...   light.dir = np.dot(rotmat, light_dir)
  ...   m1.pos4d = np.dot(rotmat, m1pos4d)
  ...   rays = light(100)
  ...   pos.data = []
  ...   pos(rays)
  ...   rays = experiment(rays)
  ...   # Now do the plotting
  ...   obj = plot_object(experiment, viewer=fig)
  ...   rout = plot_rays(pos.format_positions())

The plot shows four source positions and the corresponding four positions of the green
mirror on top of each other.

.. raw:: html

  <div class="figure" align="center">
  <x3d width='500px' height='400px'> 
  <scene>
  <inline url="_static/ex_pol.x3d"> </inline> 
  </scene> 
  </x3d>
  <p class="caption" style="clear:both;"><span class="caption-text">
  3D view of the instrument set up. Green lines are photon paths. The first mirror, which rotates together with the source is green, the second mirror is blue and the detector is yellow. Four different source and mirror positions are shown in the same plot. Use your mouse to rotate, pan and zoom. <a href="https://www.x3dom.org/documentation/interaction/">(Detailed instructions for camera navigation)</a> </span></p>
  </div>

We can now modify this script to use finer steps in angle and rotate the source around the full circle. In each step we record the number of photons detected and find that, indeed, it goes to zero when the two mirrors are located such that the s-polarized photons from the green mirror arrive with a parallel polarization on the blue mirror.

.. plot:: pyplots/vis_pol.py

The red circles in the plot mark experimental data from `Marshal et al. (2013) <http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013SPIE.8861E..1DM>`_ (error bars are smaller than plot symbols). In the lab, the distances between sources, mirrors, and detector are much longer than in our setup here. In the simulation, we set up the mirrors to work as if every photon hit with exactly the Brewster angle, while in practice the beam diverges visibly. In the lab, a more parallel beam can be achieved with larger distances between the components. We could change the coordiantes of the mirrors defined above to match the lab setup, but that would make the 3d display, which this example is meant to show-case, less appealing in the limited space of a website.

While not an exact match, this plot in general verifies MARXS polarization calcualtions to experimental data.
