docs/index.rst, before:

Multi-Architecture-Raytrace-Xraymission-Simulator (MARXS)
=========================================================

.. include:: ../DESCRIPTION.rst

The documentation for MARXS is split into several parts. After intalling MARXS it first explains how to use MARXS to simulate an (astronomical) observation for an existing instrument configuration, e.g. from the examples distributed with MARX or provided by an instrument team. The following section is aimed at instrument teams and proposers.

**Install MARXS**

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   install

**Using MARXS to simulate an observation**

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   runexample
   source
   results
   missions

**Define an instrument or mission with MARXS**

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2
	       
   conventions
   optics
   design
   newopticalelements
   visualization
   utils

**Contribute to MARXS development**

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2
	      
   contributing


Indices and tables
==================

* :ref:`genindex`
* :ref:`modindex`
* :ref:`search`

Commit message:

Add credits, license etc. to the docs

docs/index.rst, after:

Multi-Architecture-Raytrace-Xraymission-Simulator (MARXS)
=========================================================

.. include:: ../DESCRIPTION.rst

The documentation for MARXS is split into several parts. After intalling MARXS it first explains how to use MARXS to simulate an (astronomical) observation for an existing instrument configuration, e.g. from the examples distributed with MARX or provided by an instrument team. The following section is aimed at instrument teams and proposers.

.. note:: 

   MARXS has been used to simulate two instruments (ARCUS and REDSoX), but is still under
   rapid develoment. We will try to mimimize API changes from now on, but will implement those
   as necessary (e.g. the astropy units system will be used on more places in the future to
   reduce unit mismatches). The :ref:`changelog` will always contain a full list of changes
   between released versions.

**Install MARXS**

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   install

**Using MARXS to simulate an observation**

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   runexample
   source
   results
   missions

**Define an instrument or mission with MARXS**

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2
	       
   conventions
   optics
   design
   newopticalelements
   visualization
   utils

**Contribute to MARXS development**

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2
	      
   contributing

**MARXS project details**

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   changelog
   credits
   licenses


Indices and tables
==================

* :ref:`genindex`
* :ref:`modindex`
* :ref:`search`
